doc: DuckDB native support for HuggingFace urls (#2817)
huggingface/dataset-viewer: docs/source/duckdb_cli_sql.md

> # Performing SQL operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Perform SQL operations
```

Performing SQL operations with DuckDB opens up a world of possibilities for querying datasets efficiently. Let's dive into some examples showcasing the power of DuckDB functions.

> For our demonstration, we'll explore a fascinating dataset: A the multitask test containing multiple-choice questions spanning various domains of knowledge. You can access the dataset [here](https://huggingface.co/datasets/cais/mmlu).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our demonstration, we'll explore a fascinating dataset. The [MMLU](https://huggingface.co/datasets/cais/mmlu) dataset is a multitask test containing multiple-choice questions spanning various knowledge domains.
```

To preview the dataset, let's select a sample of 3 rows:

```bash

> FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet' USING SAMPLE 3;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet' USING SAMPLE 3;
```

│ Which of the follo…  │ miscellaneous    │ [A campaign manager's introduction of a mayoral candidate, A professor's lecture on the structure of the heart, A company president's yearly sales report,…  │      0 │
│ Are strategies of …  │ security_studies │ [No, arms control does not serve any purpose outside the realm of traditional military weapons., Yes, successful policies of arms control and deterrence h…  │      2 │
│ Find all c in Z_3 …  │ abstract_algebra │ [0, 2, 1, 3]                                                                                                                                                 │      1 │
└──────────────────────┴──────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴────────┘

```

This command retrieves a random sample of 3 rows from the dataset for us to examine.

Let's start by examining the schema of our dataset. The following table outlines the structure of our dataset:

```bash

> DESCRIBE FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet' USING SAMPLE 3;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DESCRIBE FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet' USING SAMPLE 3;
```

┌─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────────┐
│ column_name │ column_type │  null   │   key   │ default │  extra  │
│   varchar   │   varchar   │ varchar │ varchar │ varchar │ varchar │
├─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤
│ question    │ VARCHAR     │ YES     │         │         │         │
│ subject     │ VARCHAR     │ YES     │         │         │         │
│ choices     │ VARCHAR[]   │ YES     │         │         │         │
│ answer      │ BIGINT      │ YES     │         │         │         │
└─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────────┘

```
Next, let's analyze if there are any duplicated records in our dataset:

```bash
SELECT   *,
         COUNT(*) AS counts

> FROM     'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM     'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet'
```

GROUP BY ALL
HAVING   counts > 2; 

┌──────────┬─────────┬───────────┬────────┬────────┐
│ question │ subject │  choices  │ answer │ counts │
│ varchar  │ varchar │ varchar[] │ int64  │ int64  │
├──────────┴─────────┴───────────┴────────┴────────┤
│                      0 rows                      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

```

Fortunately, our dataset doesn't contain any duplicate records.

> Lets see the proportion of questions based on the subject in a bar representation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see the proportion of questions based on the subject in a bar representation:
```

```bash
SELECT 
    subject, 
    COUNT(*) AS counts, 

>     BAR(COUNT(*), 0, (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet')) AS percentage 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    BAR(COUNT(*), 0, (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM 'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet')) AS percentage 
```

FROM 

>     'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet' 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet' 
```

│ miscellaneous                │    783 │ ████▍                                                                          │
│ professional_psychology      │    612 │ ███▍                                                                           │
│ high_school_psychology       │    545 │ ███                                                                            │
│ high_school_macroeconomics   │    390 │ ██▏                                                                            │
│ elementary_mathematics       │    378 │ ██▏                                                                            │
│ moral_disputes               │    346 │ █▉                                                                             │
├──────────────────────────────┴────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ 57 rows (8 shown)                                                                                           3 columns  │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

```

> Now, let's prepare a subset of the dataset containing questions related to **nutrition** and create a mapping of questions to correct answers:
> Notice that we have the column **choices** from wich we can get the correct aswer using the **answer** column as an index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's prepare a subset of the dataset containing questions related to **nutrition** and create a mapping of questions to correct answers.
Notice that we have the column **choices** from which we can get the correct answer using the **answer** column as an index.
```

```bash
SELECT *

> FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet'
```

├──────────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────┤
│ Which foods tend t…  │ nutrition │ [Meat, Confectionary, Fruits and vegetables, Potatoes]                                                                                                              │      2 │
│ In which one of th…  │ nutrition │ [If the incidence rate of the disease falls., If survival time with the disease increases., If recovery of the disease is faster., If the population in which the…  │      1 │
│ Which of the follo…  │ nutrition │ [The flavonoid class comprises flavonoids and isoflavonoids., The digestibility and bioavailability of isoflavones in soya food products are not changed by proce…  │      0 │
└──────────────────────┴───────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴────────┘

```

```bash
SELECT question,
       choices[answer] AS correct_answer

> FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet'
```

├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Which foods tend to be consumed in lower quantities in Wales and Scotland (as of 2020)?\n                                           │ Confectionary                               │
│ In which one of the following circumstances will the prevalence of a disease in the population increase, all else being constant?\n │ If the incidence rate of the disease falls. │
│ Which of the following statements is correct?\n                                                                                     │                                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┘

```

To ensure data cleanliness, let's remove any newline characters at the end of the questions and filter out any empty answers:

```bash
SELECT regexp_replace(question, '\n', '') AS question,
       choices[answer] AS correct_answer

> FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu@~parquet/all/test/*.parquet'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM   'hf://datasets/cais/mmlu/all/test-*.parquet'
```

│                                                              varchar                                                              │                   varchar                   │
├───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Which foods tend to be consumed in lower quantities in Wales and Scotland (as of 2020)?                                           │ Confectionary                               │
│ In which one of the following circumstances will the prevalence of a disease in the population increase, all else being constant? │ If the incidence rate of the disease falls. │
│ Which vitamin is a major lipid-soluble antioxidant in cell membranes?                                                             │ Vitamin D                                   │
└───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┘

```
Finally, lets hightlight some of the DuckDB functions used in this section:

> - `DESCRIBE`, returns the table schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DESCRIBE`, returns the table schema.
```

- `USING SAMPLE`, samples are used to randomly select a subset of a dataset.

> - `BAR`, draws a band whose width is proportional to (x - min) and equal to width characters when x = max. width defaults to 80.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `BAR`, draws a band whose width is proportional to (x - min) and equal to width characters when x = max. Width defaults to 80.
```

- `string[begin:end]`, extracts a string using slice conventions. Missing begin or end arguments are interpreted as the beginning or end of the list respectively. Negative values are accepted.

> - `regexp_replace`, if string contains the regexp pattern, replaces the matching part with replacement
> - `LENGTH`, gets the number of characters in string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `regexp_replace`, if the string contains the regexp pattern, replaces the matching part with replacement.
- `LENGTH`, gets the number of characters in the string.
```

<Tip>

> There are plenty of useful functions available at https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/overview. The best part is that you can now directly use them on Hugging Face datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are plenty of useful functions available in DuckDB's [SQL functions overview](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/overview). The best part is that you can use them directly on Hugging Face datasets.
```
